Capstone Report: Maternal Mortality in Mexico

Many women have benefited from massive improvements in care during pregnancy and childbirth and advances in prenatal and postnatal health care; however, maternal mortality remains a major medical problem around the world. Sexual and reproductive health problems remain responsible for one third of health issues for women between the ages of 15 and 44 years.

An upwards of 13 million adolescent girls (under 20) give birth every year, and complications from those pregnancies and childbirth are a leading cause of death for those young mothers (many suffer the consequences of unsafe abortion). According to the World Health Organization, 800 women die every day from preventable pregnancy and childbirth-related causes, with 99 percent of those deaths occurring in developing countries. Most of these deaths could have been prevented, had access to family planning and to some quite basic services been in place. 

In 1990, the United Nations created 8 Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which range from halving extreme poverty rates to halting the spread of HIV/AIDS and providing universal primary education, all by the target date of 2015. One core objective was to reduce maternal mortality by three-quarters worldwide.

The Health Ministry of the Executive Branch is responsible for disease prevention and health promotion within Mexico. The Mexican Government’s Office of the President and the Health Ministry of Mexico need Data Scientists to help identify unaddressed causes of maternal mortality and possible solutions to further reduce the incidence of maternal deaths. This information can then be provided to local government officials, clinicians and public health professionals, who are all on the forefront of maternal patient care and will have the most impact on helping Mexico meet their country’s share of the Millennium Development Goals.

I utilized the SALUD data repository, which was curated from trh group, Data Science for Social Good, who sourced their data from the Ministry of Health. This dataset contains public information on cases of death in Mexico related to maternal mortality for the years 2002 through 2017. 

The primary purpose of this study was to identify maternal mortality statistics in Mexico. Given that most of maternal deaths can be prevented, the prediction of the likelihood of death of maternal patients is a massively important task. It should be noted that any misinterpretation of data can be misleading, and averages are no expecption. Averages hide the range of different data points within a single number which can result in a dichotomized perception of the sample data. In order to compensate for this overdramatization of the data, one needs to look for the majority and assess where the spreads overlap.

Truthfully, the incidence of maternal mortality has decreased since the UN initiative in 2015, but it is important to assess which regions accomplished the largest changes over time, and which factors contributed to the reduction of maternal mortality. Creating a predictive model that incorporate these factors is an effective tool to maintain a low rate or maternal mortality long term. The proposed method is based on Random Forest, which allowed the identification of "2" independent predictors from "3" predictive factors in order to create a predictive model to assess the factors associated with reducing the rate of maternal mortality within each State of Mexico.

Machine learning methods are becoming increasingly relevant as data availability increases, as well as the general understanding of the complex dynamic changes in indicators with a significant number of interrelated factors. Additionally, since scientific significance is the foundation of the results, it is possible to make the results interpretable from a clinical point of view.

The following methods consist of: Random Forest Classifier, KNeighbors Classifier, Logistic Regression, and Gaussian Naive Bayes. For the interpretation of differences between individual parameters of the mothers in two classes predicted failure (maternal mortality) verses prediction success (maternal vitality), the problem of classification via using the decision tree can be solved. The target is prediction failure class.

Note: This project is still in progress, so some files may be incomplete or contain notes for further analysis.
